Docs: Add Daft into Iceberg documentation (#9836)
apache/iceberg: docs/docs/daft.md

---
title: "Daft"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

> # Daft

Reviewer: so it seems the site can't be actually built when running the docs locally

Author: I was able to successfully build the site with `mkdocs serve`!
```
INFO    -  Documentation built in 0.38 seconds
INFO    -  [12:52:52] Watching paths for changes: 'docs', 'mkdocs.yml'
INFO    -  [12:52:52] Serving on http://127.0.0.1:8000/
```

<img width="1180" alt="image" src="https://github.com/apache/iceberg/assets/17691182/54e6353d-dbd6-4392-85dd-3cfe08364db3">

Did you have an error message here that I can look at the debug the issue?

Reviewer: I was using https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/aff5b39a7dddd22790b6ba47f514860c53e33c00/site/README.md to locally serve the site. @bitsondatadev can you double-check please if the site properly renders when running `./dev/serve.sh` works for you?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I used to have a "nightly" build in there, but we took it out initially to avoid confusion. I think part of the build can just be to add "local" or something. Currently, the build just grabs the latest semantic version and points latest there, we could just do the same and point /site/docs/docs/local >> /docs and maybe expose another build option to enable that.

Reviewer: @bitsondatadev is this PR here ready to go in?

Daft DataFrames are a powerful interface to power use-cases across ML/AI training, batch inference, feature engineering and traditional analytics. Daft's tight integration with Iceberg unlocks novel capabilities for both traditional analytics and Pythonic ML workloads on your data catalog.

## Enabling Iceberg support in Daft

[PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) supports reading of Iceberg tables into Daft DataFrames. 

To use Iceberg with Daft, ensure that the [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) library is also installed in your current Python environment.

```
pip install getdaft pyiceberg
```

## Querying Iceberg using Daft

Daft interacts natively with [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) to read Iceberg tables.

### Reading Iceberg tables

> **Setup Steps**
> 
> To follow along with this code, first create an Iceberg table following [the spark-quickstart tutorial](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-quickstart/). PyIceberg must then be correctly configured by ensuring that our `~/.pyiceberg.yaml` file contains an appropriate catalog entry:
> 

> > ```

Reviewer: why are `> ` needed here? I think those should all be removed

Author: Done!

> catalog:
>   default:
>     # URL to the Iceberg REST server Docker container
>     uri: http://localhost:8181
>     # URL and credentials for the MinIO Docker container
>     s3.endpoint: http://localhost:9000
>     s3.access-key-id: admin
>     s3.secret-access-key: password
> ```

> Here is how we can load the Iceberg table `demo.nyc.taxis` into Daft:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is how the Iceberg table `demo.nyc.taxis` can be loaded into Daft:
```

``` py
import daft
from pyiceberg.catalog import load_catalog

# Configure Daft to use the local MinIO Docker container for any S3 operations
daft.set_planning_config(
    default_io_config=daft.io.IOConfig(
        s3=daft.io.S3Config(endpoint_url="http://localhost:9000"),
    )
)

# Load a PyIceberg table into Daft, and show the first few rows
table = load_catalog("default").load_table("nyc.taxis")
df = daft.read_iceberg(table)
df.show()
```

```

> WARNING:root:IcebergScanOperator(default.nyc.taxis) has Partitioning Keys: [PartitionField(vendor_id#Int64, src=vendor_id#Int64, tfm=Identity)] but no partition filter was specified. This will result in a full table scan.

Reviewer: do we need to show this warning?

Author: I thought it would be helpful in demonstrating the predicate pushdowns, but I can remove this as well since it does feel a little confusing!

 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Daft

[Daft](www.getdaft.io) is a Python/Rust-based distributed query engine with a Python DataFrame API.

Iceberg supports reading of Iceberg tables into Daft DataFrames by using the Python client library [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/).

For Python users, Daft is complementary to PyIceberg as a query engine layer:

* **PyIceberg:** catalog/table management tasks (e.g. creation of tables, modifying table schemas)

> * **Daft:** querying tables (e.g. previewing tables, data ETL and analysis)

Author: Amended section to bring across strengths of Daft better!

> In database terms, PyIceberg is the Data Description Language (DDL) for database administration and Daft is the Data Manipulation Language (DML) for querying data.

Author: I see, I was trying to bring across the power of why PyIceberg + Daft is such an ultimate combination. Fixed this section to bring across the story of ML+Python on the data catalog a little more strongly, without the DML/DDL analogy.

│ ---        ┆ ---        ┆ ---                            │
│ Date       ┆ Int64      ┆ Utf8                           │
╞════════════╪════════════╪════════════════════════════════╡
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186280097 ┆ ions sleep about the si        │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 175366628  ┆ gular accoun                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186602151 ┆ blithely even                  │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3937663654 ┆ ake boldly among the ideas. s… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186781220 ┆ thely. slyly pending ideas ar… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3937999493 ┆  haggle at the regular, pen    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186933061 ┆ ickly. slyly                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3938167204 ┆ carefully silent instructions… │
╰────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────────────────╯

(Showing first 8 rows)
```

> Any subsequent filter operations on the Daft `df` DataFrame object will be correctly optimized to take advantage of Iceberg features such as hidden partitioning and file-level statistics for efficient reads.

Author: Nicee :)

``` py
import datetime

# Filter which takes advantage of partition pruning capabilities of Iceberg
df = df.where(df["L_SHIPDATE"] > datetime.date(1993, 1, 1))

> df.show()

Reviewer 2: Try to update this with a date field...I was trying to materialize the snapshot table and I had just found the from_pylist method but not sure if it will work with a custom object since it is a List of Dictionaries.

Author: We currently only support lists of dictionaries for `from_pylist`. I'll figure out the field with the Spark demo!

╞════════════╪════════════╪════════════════════════════════╡
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695313125 ┆  slyly special p               │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701326853 ┆ ironic instru                  │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695313766 ┆ ly according                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701330720 ┆ y alongside of the blithely    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695315200 ┆ ckly final foxes haggle car    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701331524 ┆ ns doze slyly pending instruc… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695317377 ┆ re about the ironic, silen     │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701342819 ┆ fully even pinto beans wa      │
╰────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────────────────╯

(Showing first 8 rows)
```

### Type compatibility

Daft and Iceberg have compatible type systems. Here are how types are converted across the two systems.

> When reading from an Iceberg source into Daft:

Author: It might actually be different in the other direction, since the Daft types are a superset of the Iceberg types (e.g. we'll have to figure out how the Daft tensor types will interact with Iceberg). I can remove this for now until we have write support though.
